=head1 NAME

makepplog -- Textual analysis of the build log

=for vc $Id: makepplog.pod,v 1.13 2010/09/13 21:17:25 pfeiffer Exp $

=head1 DESCRIPTION

=for genindex '[-$][-?\w]+' makepplog.pod

B<?:>E<nbsp>L<-?|/_>,E<nbsp>
B<A:>E<nbsp>L<-A|/a_filename>,
  L<--args-file|/a_filename>,
  L<--arguments-file|/a_filename>,E<nbsp>
B<C:>E<nbsp>L<-C|/c>,
  L<-c|/c>,
  L<--current-working-directory|/c>,
  L<--current-working-directory-and-up|/c>,E<nbsp>
B<F:>E<nbsp>L<-f|/f>,
  L<--follow|/f>,E<nbsp>
B<H:>E<nbsp>L<-h|/_>,
  L<--help|/_>,E<nbsp>
B<I:>E<nbsp>L<-i|/i>,
  L<--installation-directories|/i>,
  L<--install-dirs|/i>,E<nbsp>
B<K:>E<nbsp>L<-K|/k>,
  L<-k|/k_list>,
  L<--keylist|/k_list>,
  L<--keys|/k_list>,E<nbsp>
B<L:>E<nbsp>L<-l|/l_filename>,
  L<--log|/l_filename>,
  L<--log-file|/l_filename>,E<nbsp>
B<M:>E<nbsp>L<$MAKEPPLOGFLAGS|/_makepplogflags>,E<nbsp>
B<N:>E<nbsp>L<-n|/n>,
  L<--no-indent|/n>,E<nbsp>
B<O:>E<nbsp>L<-o|/o_filename>,
  L<--output|/o_filename>,E<nbsp>
B<P:>E<nbsp>L<-p|/p>,
  L<--prefix|/p>,E<nbsp>
B<S:>E<nbsp>L<--showkey|/k>,E<nbsp>
B<T:>E<nbsp>L<-t|/t>,
  L<--tabulate|/t>,E<nbsp>
B<U:>E<nbsp>L<-u|/u>,
  L<--uniq|/u>,
  L<--unique|/u>,E<nbsp>
B<V:>E<nbsp>L<-V|/v>,
  L<--version|/v>

B<makepplog> I<option> ...

B<mppl> I<option> ...

Makepp by default writes a detailed log of its decision finding and actions.
So as to not waste its time with pretty printing, this data is dumped in a
compact but fairly cryptical format.  This tool does the pretty printing in
various formats.  For a less detailed but even prettier graphical view see
L<makeppgraph|makeppgraph>.

This is solely based on the contents of the log file, so it can be performed
at any time, and even on a different machine.  Valid options are:


=over

=item -A I<filename>

=item --args-file=I<filename>

=item --arguments-file=I<filename>

Read the file and parse it as possibly quoted whitespace- and/or newline-separated options.

=item -c

=item --current-working-directory

=item -C I<number>

=item --current-working-directory-and-up=I<number>

The first two options strip the current directory from the front of all
filenames it outputs.  The second two additionally replace I<number>
directories up from here, with the necessary number of F<../> entries.

These options only work meaningfully when you call makepplog in the same
directory makepp ran, or one near there.

=item -f

=item --follow

As in C<tail> command, process more lines of logfile as it grows.

=item -?

=item -h

=item --help

Print out a brief summary of the options.

=item -i

=item --install-dirs

=item --installation-directories

These options replace the invocation of makepp and the pathes to the built in
makefiles with F<.../> so as to keep odd pathes out of your sight.

=item -k I<list>

=item --keys=I<list>

=item --keylist=I<list>

The I<list> specifies one or more space separated Shell style patterns (with
[xyz], ?, *, {a,bc,def}).  Remember to protect these from your Shell by
quoting.  These are matched against the message keys (as shown by
C<--showkey>).  Each pattern may be preceded with an exclamtion mark (C<!>) or
a caret (C<^>) to exclude the matched keys from those selected before instead
of adding them to the selection.  If the first pattern starts with an
exclamtion mark, it operates on all keys.  There are a few key prefixes with
fixed meanings so you can select categories of keys:

=over

=item BC*

All build cache related messages.

=item BUILD*

All build reason related messages.

=item LOAD*

All makefile loading related messages.

=item REP*

All repository related messages.

=item RULE*

All rule related messages.

=item SCAN*

All scanning related messages.

=back

    --keys='LOAD* RULE*'	# Only makefile loading and rule messages.
    --keys='!BUILD* *CMD'	# No build messages, except BUILD_CMD.

=item -K

=item --showkey

This prefixes each output line with the internal name of the message key, for
use with C<--keys>.

=item -l I<filename>

=item --log=I<filename>

=item --log-file=I<filename>

The I<filename> is to where makepp wrote its log.  It may also be a directory,
in which a file called F<.makepp/log> or F<log> will be searched.  To read
from stdin, you must give F<-> as a I<filename>.  When this option is not
given, it defaults to the current directory.

This option can be given multiple times, e.g. for merging all the logs from
C<--traditional-recursive-make>.  But it will get the message version
information, which keeps track of message formats, only from the first file.
So if you feed it log files from different version of makepp in the same
invocation, output can get a bit messed up.

=item -n

=item --no-indent

Makepp puts indentation information into the log file to show you what
happened because of what else.  This option turns indentation off.

=item -o I<filename>

=item --output=I<filename>

Write the output to this file, rather than stdout.

=item -p

=item --prefix

Prefix every structured message with the string "makepplog: ".  IDEs like
Emacs can then parse the lines and hyperlink to the mentioned files.

=item -t

=item --tabulate

Put each list item on a new line, rather than outputting a line that can
easily become longer than a screenful.

=item -u

=item --uniq

=item --unique

Report each found include statement and each scan output only once.

=item -V

=item --version

Print out the version number.

=back

=head1 EXAMPLES

If you want to know which file includes which other file, and nothing else:

    makeppclean -r
    makepp			# Full build to scan all source files.
    makepplog -p '/^INCL$/'

If you want to format lines with a prefix so Emacs' compilation-mode can parse
the lines and exlude all scanning related messages:

    makepplog -mp '!/^SCAN/'

If you want to explore which keys you can exclude or include in the above
manners:

    makepplog -kn

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

Makepplog looks at the following environment variable:

=over 4

=item $MAKEPPLOGFLAGS

Any flags in this environment variable are interpreted as command line options
before any explicit options.  Quotes are interpreted like in makefiles.

=back

=head1 AUTHOR

Daniel Pfeiffer (occitan@esperanto.org)
