=head1 NAME

makepp_build_algorithm -- How makepp executes a makefile

=for vc $Id: makepp_build_algorithm.pod,v 1.5 2006/03/27 21:56:53 pfeiffer Exp $

=head1 DESCRIPTION

Makepp's internals differ from the standard unix make in fundamental ways.
This page describes the different philosophy in detail.

=head2 Reverse vs. forward inference

Makepp works in the opposite direction from the standard unix make.
Traditional unix make is given a target to build, and then it finds a
rule which matches the characters in the target filename.  If the target
is older than any of its dependencies of the rule, then it is rebuilt.

For example, consider this pattern rule:

    %.o: %.cxx
 	$(CXX) $(CXXFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

When make realizes it needs to make a file called C<xyz.o>, it searches
through its list of pattern rules until it sees that C<xyz.o> matches
the pattern C<%.o>, and then it applies this rule.

Makepp works in the opposite direction.  It first computes all files
that it can possibly build by applying rules that match the characters
in the dependency filenames.  Then when it needs to build a file, it
simply looks to see if it's one of the files that it knows how to build.
The list of known files is stored based on the absolute filename.

When makepp encounters the above pattern rule, it searches for all files
in the directory matching the pattern C<%.cxx> (i.e., C<*.cxx>).  For
each of these files, it then remembers that it can produce the
corresponding C<.o> file.  If subsequently makepp discovers that it can
make another C<.cxx> file that doesn't currently exist, this rule will
also be applied and the corresponding C<.o> file will be marked.

This might seem somewhat inefficient, but it turns out not to be that
slow in most cases, and it is often true that virtually all the files
that can be built are in fact built.  And knowing the complete list of
files that can be built has several advantages:

=over 4

=item *

Wildcards can match files which don't exist yet but can be built.

=item *

Header files which have been detected by the automatic dependency
scanner don't have to exist; makepp knows where they will be.  (Most
other solutions to this problem assume that any headers which don't
exist yet are in the current directory.)

=item *

Repositories are much simpler to implement since makepp knows beforehand
what files it can make.  (See L<makepp_repositories> for details.)

=item *

It is possible to determine easily which files can be built (see the
S<C<$(only_targets )>> function.

=item *

Makepp's S<C<$(infer_objects )>> function is greatly simplified by
knowing what objects are available.

=back

=head2 Files vs. textual patterns

Makepp associates build commands with a target file, not to a textual
pattern for a filename.  It is therefore not confused by different names
for the same file.  Thus, for example, makepp will know that C<./xyz>
and and C<xyz> are the same file, whereas other make utilities may not.

This is particularly important because (unlike the standard make) makepp
loads makefiles from different directories.  In order for the makefiles
to be relatively independent, with no special position given to a
top-level makefile, each makefile refers to all files relative to its
own directory. Thus if you load a makefile from the subdirectory
C<other_stuff>, and that makefile refers to C<../xyz>, makepp will again
realize that it's the same file referred to above.  (It also won't be
confused by soft-linked directory names.)

=head2 Stored build information

Makepp stores much more information about each file that it builds
beyond just the date stamp (which is all that the standard make cares
about).  This information includes:

=over 4

=item *

The signature of this file
on the last build, so we know if the file itself has changed.

=item *

The names of each dependency file, including include files and other
files inferred automatically.  If this list changes, then makepp assumes
it needs to rebuild.

=item *

The signature of each dependency.  This way, makepp knows to rebuild not
only when the dependencies are newer than the target, but when they
change at all.  This also makes it possible to use other kinds of
signatures, such as cryptographic checksums, rather than the file date.

=item *

The entire build command (and its cwd).  This way if you change the
build command (e.g., change the compiler options), makepp knows to
rebuild even if the files themselves haven't changed.

=item *

The architecture.  If you have compiled your program on linux
and then switch to solaris, makepp automatically knows to
recompile everything.

=back

Makepp makes a subdirectory in every directory that it touches called
C<.makepp>.  The build information for a file F<filename> in a directory
is stored in F<.makepp/filename>.  If you delete this subdirectory or
alter the files, makepp will rebuild all affected files.

=head2 Implicit loading

If makepp is trying to build a target in a directory and doesn't have a
rule for it yet, or if it is looking for files matching a wildcard in a
directory, it will look in that directory to see if a makefile is
present.  If so, the makefile will be loaded automatically.

This means that you usually don't have to tell makepp explicitly where
to find makefiles--all you have to do is to reference a file in another
directory, and makepp will automatically figure out how to build it.

Implicit loading will occur only if the directory is writable to you.  Thus if
you want to prevent makepp from trying to build a bunch of things that never
change, simply make the directory read-only.

Implicit loading will not occur if you are in a tree under a
F<RootMakeppfile(.mk)> and the other makefile is outside that tree.  If you do
want this once, you can give a C<--do-build=/> option to makepp, to make
everything outside the tree buildable.  If you always want this, you can put a
C<load_makefile> statement somewhere within the tree to explicitly connect it
to the tree.

If implicit loading gets in your way (i.e., makepp loads too many
makefiles and it wastes time, or else you really don't want it to try to
rebuild all the stuff described in the makefiles), you can turn it off
for all directories using the C<--noimplicit_load> command line option,
or you can turn it off for selected directories using the
C<no_implicit_load> statement in your makefile.
