=head1 NAME

makepp_repositories -- How to use repositories for variant builds, for
maintaining a central set of sources, and other things

=for vc $Id: makepp_repositories.pod,v 1.18 2008/07/19 21:44:20 pfeiffer Exp $

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A B<repository> is a directory or directory hierarchy outside of the default
directory that contains files which the makefile needs in the current
directory tree.  Makepp can automatically link files from the repository into
the current directory tree if they are needed.  Repositories provide similar
functionality to the C<VPATH> variable in some versions of make, but (unlike
C<VPATH>) you do not have to do anything special to your makefile to get them
to work.

Repositories are specified with the C<-R> or C<--repository> command
line option (see L<makepp_command/-R>) or with the C<repository>
statement (see L<makepp_statements/repository>) in the makefile.

Repositories are useful in several different situations:

=over 4

=item *

When you want to place your object and executable files in a separate
directory, but the makefile is written to place them in the same
directory as the sources.

=item *

When you want to build the same program two different ways (e.g., with
two different sets of compilation options, or for two different
architectures).

=item *

When you don't have write access to all or part of the source tree.

=item *

When several developers are working on the same project, and there is a
common source repository containing all the sources for the project.
Each developer can modify only the files he needs to change in his local
directory without affecting the other developers, and makepp will
automatically fetch the unmodified files from the source repository.

=back

Makepp's implementation of repositories does not require rewriting of
the build commands at all, unlike (for example) repositories in cons.
Makepp puts a symbolic link into the directory where the command is
expecting it.  As long as the command does not refer to absolute
directories, the exact same shell command will work with files from a
repository.  This means that it works not only for compilation commands,
but any kind of command you can think to put in your makefile.

Makepp has another kind of mechanism called a I<build cache> which
solves some of the same sorts of problems as repositories in a different
way.  Depending on your problem, a build cache may be more useful than a
repository.  See L<makepp_build_cache> for information about build
caches and a comparison of build caches and repositories.

=head2 Examples

Repositories are best explained by several examples of what you can do.

=head3 Different compilation options

Suppose you have a simple program with a makefile that looks something
like this:

    CFLAGS	= -O2
    OBJECTS = a.o b.o c.o
    my_program: $(OBJECTS)
    	cc $(inputs) -o $(output)
 
    %.o: %.c
    	cc $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

This makefile places the files C<a.o>, C<b.o>, C<c.o>, and C<my_program>
in the same directory as the source files.

Sometimes you want to place the binary files into a separate directory.
For example, you might build your program on several different
architectures, and you don't want the binary files on one architecture
to be replaced with the binary files on the other.  Or you might want to
make a temporary change and recompile without wiping out the previous
compilation results.  Without repositories, you would have to modify
your makefile to place the objects elsewhere.

With a repository, however, you don't have to touch your makefile
at all.  Consider the following sequence of commands:

    % cd my_program_source
    % makepp			# Builds using the above makefile, and
    				# object files go into the directory
    				# my_program_source.
    % cd ..
    % mkdir binary-debug        # Make a clean directory for building the
    % cd binary-debug		# same program with different options.
    % makepp -R ../my_program_source CFLAGS=-g
                                # Now objects go into binary-debug.

The first makepp command compiles the source files with optimization and
puts the objects into the directory C<my_program_source>, because that's
what the makefile is supposed to do.  Now we want to rebuild the
program, but we want to change the value of C<CFLAGS> to compile for
debug.  We specify the new value of C<CFLAGS> on the command line, and
we also tell makepp that the C<my_program_source> directory is a
repository using the C<-R> option.

Every time makepp realizes that it needs a file that it doesn't already have
in current directory, it looks in the repository.  In this case, it first
looks for the makefile, which doesn't exist in the C<binary-debug>
subdirectory.  So it creates a symbolic link to it from the makefile in
C<my_program_source>, and then reads in the makefile.  Then it notices that it
needs the file C<a.c> in order to build C<a.o>, and so it links in C<a.c> from
the repository.  If C<a.c> includes any files contained in
C<my_program_source>, then these will be automatically linked in as well.
Note: Those links are useful for things like debugging, but if you don't like
them, C<makeppclean -R> can remove them.

Running the build command in C<binary-debug> won't touch any of the
files in C<my_program_source>.  Thus from the same set of source files,
you now have two different copies of the program, one compiled with
optimization and one compiled for debug.  And this happened without
touching the makefile at all.

The advantage of using repositories instead of simply recompiling and
overwriting the original binaries is that now if we fix our bugs and
want to go back to the optimized version, we don't have to recompile
everything.  Since the original object files are still around, and most
of them are still valid, we can save a lot of time on recompilation.
This does not make a big difference when only three source files are
involved, but for a larger build that takes minutes or hours to
complete, the savings in programmer time and frustration can be
significant.

=head3 Rebuilding one file with a minor modification to the compilation commands

Makepp doesn't fetch only source files from the repository.  If the
object files in the repository don't need rebuilding, it will use them.
For example, consider a slight modification to the above makefile:

    CFLAGS   := -O2
    A_CFLAGS := -O6 -funroll-loops
 
    OBJECTS := a.o b.o c.o
 
    my_program: $(OBJECTS)
    	cc $(inputs) -o $(output)
 
    %.o: %.c
    	cc $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)
 
    a.o: a.c
    	cc $(A_CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)


The idea is that C<a.o> contains the time-critical code, so it is
compiled with higher optimization than the rest of the objects.  Now
suppose we want to test just how different the timing is with different
compile options.  A repository can help with this, too:

    % cd my_program_source
    % makepp			# Builds using the above makefile, and
    				# object files go into the directory
    				# my_program_source.
    % cd ..
    % mkdir no-unrolling        # Make a clean directory for building the
    % cd no-unrolling           # same program with different options.
    % makepp -R ../my_program_source A_CFLAGS=-O2
    % cd ..
    % time no-unrolling/my_program # Benchmark the two versions of the program.
    % time my_program_source/my_program


Makepp proceeds as before, linking in a copy of the makefile and then
examining the object files.  Now only the C<a.o> module needs
recompiling, since the options for C<b.o> and C<c.o> haven't changed.
Makepp notices that it can use C<b.o> and C<c.o> from the repository, so
it just links those in.  However, it will recompile C<a.o> in the
C<no-unrolling> directory.  Once the compilation is finished, the two
different versions of the program can be benchmarked.

=head3 Rebuilding with a minor modification to the source

Now suppose we want to make a change to C<a.c> and benchmark the program
before and after the change.  Repositories can help again.  Consider
this sequence of commands:

    % mkdir modified-a
    % cp my_program_source/a.c modified-a
    % cd modified-a
    % emacs a.c			# Make some modifications just to this module.
    % makepp -R ../my_program_source

Here we have created a new directory that just contains the single
source file we want to modify.  Makepp now takes C<a.c> from the
C<modified-a> subdirectory, but uses the copies of C<b> and C<c> from
the C<my_program_source> directory.  Without changing any of the binary
files in C<my_program_source>, we have created a separate copy of the
program that incorporates our changes to C<a.c>.  If there are other
developers using the sources in C<my_program_source>, they will be
unaffected by our changes.

Repositories can thus be used as a quick way to build variants of a
program, without adding complicated conditions to the makefile.  None of
the files in the original directory are modified; they are used as
needed.

=head3 Using a directory hierarchy

A repository is actually not just a single directory, it's a whole
directory hierarchy.  Suppose you use F</our/library> as a repository.
Now F</our/library> may well contain many subdirectories, e.g.,
F</our/library/gui> and F</our/library/network>.  Consider this command:

    % makepp -R /our/library

Any commands in the makefile that refer to files in the directory
F<./network> will actually get files from F</our/library/network>, and
similarly for F<./gui>.  Makepp automatically creates any directories
that exist in the repository but not in the current directory.

=head3 Linking to any place in the file system

All of the above examples show files from a repository being
linked into the current directory or its subdirectories, but you can
actually have makepp link them into any place in the file
system that you have write access to.  This is done by specifying
S<C<-R new-location=old-location>>.

For example, sometimes it's a little tedious to type the following:

       mkdir alternate-build
       cd alternate-build
       makepp -R ..

You can do it all with one command, like this:

       makepp -R alternate-build=. -F alternate-build

(C<-F> changes to that directory before loading the makefile.  See
L<makepp_command/-F> for details.  You must specify C<-R> before C<-F>.)

Assigning a different location in the file system may be also useful for
more complicated builds, where there are several library subdirectories.
For example, here's a command I have used to build variants of one of my
programs:

    % makepp -R test-build/seescape=/src/seescape \
    	 -R test-build/HLib=/src/HLib \
    	 -R test-build/H5pp=/src/H5pp \
    	 -R qwt=/src/external_libraries/qwt \
    	 -F test-build/seescape

This command loads in files from four different repositories, and then
cds to the F<./test-build/seescape> directory and executes the makefile
there.  Files contained in the directory tree beginning with
F</src/seescape> are linked into F<./test-build/seescape>.  In other
words, makepp will temporarily link the file
F</src/seescape/gui/image_canvas.cxx> to
F<./test-build/seescape/gui/image_canvas.cxx> when it is needed.  This
command will work even if the C<test-build> directory doesn't exist yet;
makepp will create it for you.  (But you must specify the C<-R> options
before the C<-F> option on the command line.)

=head3 Multiple equivalent repositories

Say your project is maintained by several fairly autonomous groups.  You could
have one complete repository with all the sources as they are in production or
at least successfully tested.  Every group can have a mostly empty repository
with (part of) the same structure, containing the files group members have
finished developing.

Developers' current directories will have the files they are still working on.
The group repository will be the first one given and the production repository
the last one, so that it furnishes the files not found in the group
repository:

    $ makepp -R/path/to/group/repository -R/path/to/production/repository

Since this is probably fairly static for that directory, you may want to put a
file F<.makepprc> at its root with the following content:

    -R/path/to/group/repository -R/path/to/production/repository

Or, presuming that it has a fixed path, you could write into your makefile:

    repository /path/to/production/repository

and, because options are seen before makefiles are read, you can call just

    $ makepp -R/path/to/group/repository

=head2 Caveats with repositories

=head3 When the links get in the way

For finding your way around your file hierarchy and for allowing the debugger
to find the sources it is useful to have the links used while building.  But
when you want to edit a file or resync it with your version control, the links
can get in the way.  That is because the system traverses the link and writes
to the file in the repository.  Unless it's your personal repository used just
for keeping things apart, that may not be what you want.

As a safeguard against inadvertent overwriting of public files it is suggested
to make the sources in the repository unwritable.  It might even not be enough
to remove the write bit, because a version control system which insists on your
locking the files for editing might also do that, but temporarily make the
file writable while resyncing it.  If that is the case for you, the repository
should actually belong to a different user.

There are a few tactics to surmount this:

=over

=item *

Keep the sources you edit in a repository, separate from your build tree.
Whenever you put a file, which was previously fetched from another repository,
into this editing repository, makepp will notice and fetch it from there,
provided it is the first repository you specify.

=item *

Remember to delete any file, before you create a copy for writing.  If you
follow the safeguard suggestion above, forgetting to do this will give an
error message when writing.  To help you, the following function C<delink>
will replace one link by a copy of the linked file.  The first variant is for
all kinds of Bournish Shells, the second one for csh (or at least tcsh):

    $ delink() { { rm $1 && cat >$1; } <$1; }
    % alias delink '( rm \!:1 && cat >\!:1; ) <\!:1'

=item *

If you feel you don't need them, you can delete them all, whenever you want,
e.g. after every makepp run, possibly backgrounded (either short or long
form):

    makeppclean --recurse --only-repository-links
    mppc -rR

=back

=head3 Don't build in a repository

A repository is meant to be read-only while it is being used as a
repository.  Makepp will B<not> work properly if you change files in
your repository during the course of a build.  Before it starts the
build, makepp gets a list of all the files that exist in the repository,
and never updates its list, except for files it expects to appear.

If you need a repository that's changing as you build, you might want to
consider makepp's build cache mechanism (see L<makepp_build_cache>).
Alternatively, you can use a "poor man's repository": you can put
explicit rules into your makefile to create the soft links, like this:

    %.c : $(directory_I_wish_was_a_repository)/%.c
 	&ln -fs $(input) $(output)

This works only for source files; you can't easily use this to link a
file if it is already built in the repository, but build it here if it's
not already built, since there is only allowed to be one way to build a
file.

=head3 Use only relative filenames

Repositories work completely transparently I<if the makefiles use only
relative filenames>.  In the above example, it's ok if the makefile in
F</src/seescape> refers to F<../HLib>, but the above command will not
work as expected if it refers to F</src/HLib>.  If you need to use
absolute file names, you can put them into make variables and then
override them on the command line, like this:

    % makepp -R test-build/seescape=/src/seescape SEESCAPE=/home/holt/test-build/seescape \
    	 -R test-build/HLib=/src/HLib HLIB=/home/holt/test-build/HLib \
    	 -R test-build/H5pp=/src/H5pp H5pp=/home/holt/test-build/H5pp \
    	 -R qwt=/src/external_libraries/qwt QWT=/home/holt/test-build/qwt \
    	 -F test-build/seescape

The above will work as long as the C<HLib> directory is referred to as
C<$(HLIB)> in all the makefiles.  Note that you have to specify absolute
paths for the directories, because makepp cd's to C<test-build/seescape>
before reading the makefile.  This leads to long and complicated make
commands; use relative paths when possible.

=head3 Makepp must know about all dependencies

Repositories will not work if there are hidden dependencies that makepp
doesn't know about.  (In fact, doing a build using repositories, is one way of
checking for forgotten dependencies.  But, just for this check, don't combine
it with a build cache, since fetching something there, instead of building it,
might hide a forgotten dependency.)  Sometimes these dependencies can be
fairly subtle.  For example, the I<libtool> command will not only create
C<.lo> and C<.la> files as listed on the command line, but it also may create
a subdirectory called C<.libs> which contains the actual object files.  To
prevent build mistakes, makepp refuses to link in a C<.la> file from a
repository.  Hopefully in the future libtool will be better supported.


Many hidden dependencies related to compilation are caught by the
command line scanner.  If your compiler uses the common unix compilation
flags (e.g., C<-I>, C<-D>, etc.), then makepp will usually figure out
where all your include files are.  However, if the compilation command
is not the first command on the command line, then makepp may not
realize it's a compilation and it won't find the hidden dependencies.
For example, consider this command from the KDE distribution:

    # This command checks to make sure all global symbols in the library are
    # properly defined, by linking a dummy program.
 
    libkdecore.la.closure: $(libkdecore_la_OBJECTS) $(libkdecore_la_DEPENDENCIES)
    	&echo "int main() {return 0;}" -o libkdecore_la_closure.cpp
    	libtool --mode=compile $(CXX) $(CXXFLAGS) -c libkdecore_la_closure.cpp
    	libtool --mode=link $(CXX) libkdecore_la_closure.lo $(libkdecore_la_LDFLAGS) $(libkdecore_la_OBJECTS) $(libkdecore_la_LIBADD) $(LIBS)

The rule action contains not just one compilation command but two;
makepp will only look at the first one.  As a result, this makefile will
not work with repositories.

Note that it would work fine if this multi-line action were broken up
into several single-line rules:

    libkdecore_la_closure.cpp:
    	&echo "int main() {return 0;}" -o libkdecore_la_closure.cpp
 
    libkdecore.la.closure: $(libkdecore_la_OBJECTS) $(libkdecore_la_DEPENDENCIES) \
    	libkdecore_la_closure.lo
    	libtool -mode=link $(CXX) -o $(output) $(inputs) $(libkdecore_la_LIBADD) $(LIBS)

You may have to be careful if you have any homegrown scripts that create
files that makepp doesn't know about.  For correct builds, it is vitally
important to list B<all> targets and dependencies (or determine them
automatically by scanning).

=head3 Putting absolute filenames into programs

Repositories will also not work if any of the files built contain
absolute file names in them (e.g., if any of your build commands write
out an absolute filename).  For example, it turns out that the C<.la>
files produced by I<libtool> have this property.  (If you look at
the contents of the C<.la> file you'll see that the dependency list
contains absolute filenames.)  In order to solve this particular
problem, makepp will not link C<.la> files from a repository; it will
insist on rebuilding them.

=head3 Avoid linking in unnecessary directories

Repositories can be slow on startup and use a lot of memory if there are
a lot of unnecessary files in the repository.  For example, if you use
an automatic HTML documentation generator which makes thousands of
C<.html> files from your source code, you may not want to put them in a
subdirectory of a directory that's used as a repository.  It's better to
put them in a different directory tree entirely, so the repository
mechanism won't load in their names.

=head3 Too Many Files

The disadvantage of repositories is that symbolic links, which the repository
mechanism uses, are individual files (though they use almost no disk space).
This is unlike real links, but those can't cross file system boundaries.  In
extreme cases the presence of very many symbolic links can lead to exhaustion
of the number of foreseen files (so called inodes), even though there is
plenty of space left.  In this case the sysadmin will need to tune the file
system.

=head2 Overriding repository copies with local copies

If you make any modifications to a file locally, makepp will ordinarily
realize this and recompile the file using the local copy rather than the
repository copy.

If you're using a repository to maintain a central code base, and you
have developers working on local copies which contain only the files
they have modified, one problem that comes up is: what if a developer
wants to remove a file from his local build but the repository still
contains it?  If the developer removes the local copy, makepp will
happily put in the copy from the repository, and the build will proceed
as if the file existed.

The best current technique (alas not for user root) for this problem is to
make the file that you want not to include in the build process unreadable,
like this:

    chmod a-rw file-to-be-excluded

This will prevent makepp from incorporating it from the repository.
Makepp also includes special code so that unreadable files do not match
wildcards or pattern rules.

Similarly, to prevent makepp from incorporating an entire subdirectory,
make a local directory that has the same name but is unwritable.  If you
want makepp to ignore the directory entirely, then make it unreadable
too.  (Read-only directories are searched but targets in them are
usually not built.)

=head2 Don't use repositories for files which can change!

Don't try to use a repository for a file which is part of your build.
For example, you might be tempted to try to use repositories to put all
of your public .h files in the same directory, like this:

    # top level makefile
    repository include=module1/include
    repository include=module2/include
    repository include=module3/include
    repository include=module4/include

This is probably not a good idea if I<any> of the F<.h> files are
themselves outputs of a program (e.g., yacc or some other program that
spits out C source code), because makepp assumes that files in
repositories never change.  If the build needs F<include/xyz.h>, and
F<module2/include/xyz.h> actually needs to be produced by some program,
makepp will not know to run the program.  It's better to use a technique
like this to put all of your F<.h> files into a common include
directory:

    # module1/Makeppfile
    ../include/%.h : include/%.h
    	&cp $(input) $(output)
    # You could also (more efficiently) do the following:
    #    &ln -r $(input) $(output)

Makepp might still try to build files that happen to be in a repository if
something asks for them directly, but it won't build them I<on behalf> of the
local directory.  The result of this can be quite confusing, because it can
lead to a repository symbolic link being used while its repository target is
out-of-date, but that target might get updated later in the build.  You can
prevent this from happening either by making sure that the repository is
referred to I<only> through the repository path, or by making sure that there
is also a local rule for all the generated repository files.

Another way to avoid recompiling identical files in different
directories is to use a build cache (see L<makepp_build_cache> for
details).  A build cache does not have the restriction that the file may
not change.
