=head1 NAME

makepp_rules -- How to tell makepp to build something

=for vc $Id: makepp_rules.pod,v 1.23 2008/02/24 21:38:44 pfeiffer Exp $

=head1 DESCRIPTION

A rule is what tells makepp how to build a file or a class of files.  Makepp
supports the same rule syntax as other implementations of make, plus some
additions of its own.

A rule has the general format

    target_expression : dependency_expression  [ : optional arguments]
 	actions

The list of targets may not contain any automatic variables (except
C<$(foreach)>).  The dependency list may contain only automatic variables
referring to the target (i.e., C<$(output)>, C<$(outputs)>, or their
synonyms).  The action may contain any automatic variables.

If makepp decides that the rule needs to be executed, each line of the rule is
executed sequentially, and if any returns a non-zero status, the remainder are
not executed (and makepp aborts with an error unless you specified the C<-k>
option on the command line.)  Each action should be only one line.  If an
action is too long to write conveniently on a single line, you can split it
into several lines and put a backslash to indicate that the several lines
should be combined into one.

In order to distinguish actions from the next rule, the action should be
indented more than the line containing the targets and dependencies.  Unlike
other implementations of make, makepp doesn't really care how much you indent
it or whether you use tab characters rather than spaces.  To keep backward
compatibility with traditional make, the rules makepp uses to decide when
actions end and the next rule begins are somewhat complicated:

=over 4

=item *

The first action line must be indented more than the line
containing the target.

=item *

If a line is indented by one tab character or 8 spaces or more,
then it is considered an action line.

=item *

A blank line or a comment line with the C<#> character at the right margin
ends the rule, unless the next non-blank line is indented more than 8 spaces
(or more than one tab).

=item *

If a line is indented as much or more than the first action
line, then it is considered an additional action line.

=back

There are a few special action items:

=over

=item noecho

=item @

Normally, each shell command is printed as it is executed.  However, if
the first word of the action is C<noecho>X<noecho> (or if it begins with
the character C<@>), then the command is not printed.  For example,

    %.o: %.cxx
 	  noecho $(LIBTOOL) --mode=compile $(CC) -c $(input)


This means that when the libtool command is executed, it is not
printed.  (Libtool itself usually prints the modified command that
it executes, so it's redundant to print it twice.)

=item ignore_error

=item -

Normally, if the shell command returns a non-zero status, then makepp
aborts because the command failed.  However, some programs incorrectly
set the status on exit, or there may be an error which really isn't
fatal and shouldn't abort the whole compilation.  You can cause makepp
to ignore the return status by specifying C<ignore_error>X<ignore_error>
as the first word of the command line (or C<-> as the first character).
For example,

    $(phony distribution):
 	ignore_error rm -r my_program-$(VERSION) # Get rid of previous junk.
 	&mkdir my_program-$(VERSION)
 	&cp $(FILES) my_program-$(VERSION)
 	tar cf my_program-$(VERSION).tar my_program-$(VERSION)

This command makes a directory, copies a bunch of files into it, and
then puts everything into a tar file for distribution.  It's a good idea
to clean out the previous contents of the directory, if there was
anything there previously, and that's what the first line does.  The
C<rm> might fail, but its return status is ignored.

=item &

This symbol shall be followed by a command name and any number of arguments.
Shell syntax is not understood fully here, only single and double quotes and
backslashed characters within, as throughout makepp.  The command name either
leads to a function C<c_I<name>> to be called with the remaining strings as
arguments.  If such a function can not be found, this is identical to calling
L<makepp_extending/run> from a C<perl> block.

This allows efficiently calling a built-in, makefile-provided or external
command.  The prefix C<&> has been chosen because it is the function invoker
in Perl, and because at the beginning it is illegal in Shell.

    $(ROOT)/include/%.h: %.h
 	&ln $(input) $(output)

=item perl

=item makeperl

This is essentially the same as the L<perl|makepp_statements/perl> statement,
but it is performed each time when running the rule, not when reading the
makefile.  The first variant is plain Perl code, while the second variant
first passes the statement through Make-style variable expansion.

For the two possibilities of putting the braces of the body, see the
explanation at L<makepp_statements/perl>.  Note that the third variant
explained there makes no sence here, because all action lines must be
indented.  You must signal failure in Perl statements, by calling C<die>.

Per rule the Perl statements are currently evaluated in a common subprocess,
except on Windows.  That means they have only read access to any makefile
variables.  It is also the process which executes non-Perl actions.  So
calling exec or exit will confuse makepp.  But this may change in the future.
For an efficient way to call Perl scripts, see the previous item C<&> or
L<makepp_extending/run>.

    $(phony version):
 	noecho perl {{	# $(target) & $(VERSION) from Perl:
 	  print "This is ".f_target()." $VERSION\n";
 	}}
 	echo You can mix this with Shell commands
 	-makeperl { print "This is $(target) $(VERSION)\n" }

=back

There are several different kinds of rules, each with different purposes.

=head2 Explicit Rules

    target1 target2: dependency1 dependency2 ...
 	actions to be performed


This syntax specifies that in order to make either F<target1> or
F<target2>, all the files F<dependency1>, F<dependency2>, etc., must
already have been made.  Then the given actions are executed by the
shell to make the targets.

The first explicit rule in a file is the default target, and is made if
you do not specify any targets on the command line.

Unlike traditional make programs, makepp usually assumes that one
invocation of the action makes all of the targets (unless there are no
dependencies).  For example, one invocation of yacc creates both output
files for this rule:

    y.tab.c y.tab.h : parser.y
 	$(YACC) -d parser.y

Note that other implementations of make do not have a concept of a
single command producing multiple output files, and so when you specify
multiple targets they will execute the rule once per target.  Makepp
will revert to this behavior if it looks like this is an old-style
makefile.  Specifically, it will execute the rule once per target,
instead of just once overall, if all of the following are true:

=over 4

=item *

The rule action mentions the automatic variable C<$@>.  (The synonymns
C<$(output)> or C<$(target)> do not trigger this behavior.)

=item *

The rule action does not mention the automatic variable C<$(outputs)> (or its
synonymn C<$(targets)>).

=item *

This is not a pattern rule, and there is no foreach clause.

=back

For example,

    all test install:
 	for subdir in $(SUBDIRS); do cd $$subdir && $(MAKE) $@; cd ..; done

is a common idiom in makefiles, and makepp supports it.  (Note that you
should never use recursive make in any new makefiles you write--use the
C<load_makefile> statement, or implicit makefile loading instead.)

If you want to have the same rule executed once for each target (e.g.,
because the targets have similar commands), it's preferable to use
either a pattern rule (see below) or a C<foreach> clause.  For example,
if with a traditional make program you would write:

    a b c d:
 	do_something to build $@ > $@

in makepp, you would probably want to write it like this:

    $(foreach) : : foreach a b c d
 	do_something to build $(output) > $(output)

=head3 Phony targets

A I<phony target> is a target that will never actually exist in the
file system; it's just a way of getting makepp to build some targets
and possibly execute some additional commands.

A typical phony target is C<all>, which usually is used to cause
everything that can be built to be built, like this:

    all: prog1 prog2 subdir/prog3 subdir2/libmine.a
 	  @&echo "All done!"

If you type S<C<makepp all>>, or if you put all as the first explicit
target in your makefile (which is typical) and just type C<makepp>,
then it will cause all the dependencies to be built, then it will
print "All done!".  At this point, makepp will look for the file
F<./all> and will discover that it doesn't exist.  It will complain
loudly.

To keep makepp from expecting the file F<./all> to exit, you need to
tell it that it's a phony target.  Just put a line like the following
in your makefile (it makes no difference where):X<.PHONY>

    .PHONY: all

An equivalent alternative which is sometimes more convenient is to use
the S<C<$(phony )>> function, like this:

    $(phony all): prog1 prog2 subdir/prog3 subdir2/libmine.a

Phony targets in one makefile can refer to phony targets in another
makefile.  This is often done with the C<clean> target, like this:

    # Top level makefile:
    # lots of rules and stuff here
    # ....
    $(phony clean): subdir1/clean subdir2/clean
 	&rm -fm my_program

Then in the subdirectories, the makefiles might read like this:

    # Makefile in a subdirectory
    # ...
    $(phony clean):
 	&rm -fm $(wildcard *.o *.a)

But nowadays you would use the C<makeppclean> command, instead of a clean
target.

=head3 Wildcards

It is safe to specify wildcards in the dependency list.  Wildcards match not
only files that exist, but files which can be created given the rules in the
makefile.  For example, to build a library from all .o files in a directory,
you could write this:

    libmine.a: *.o
 	&rm -f $(output)
 	ar cr $(output) $(inputs)

This will work even if none of the C<.o> files have been created yet, because
makepp's wildcards match files which do not yet exist but can be built.

Makepp supports all the usual shell wildcards (C<*>, C<?>, and C<[]>).  It
also has a wildcard C<**> which matches any number of intervening directories.
(This idea was stolen from zsh.)  For example, C<**/*.c> matches all the F<.c>
files in the entire source tree.  C<objects/**/*.o> matches all the F<.o>
files contained anywhere in the subdirectory F<objects> or any of its
subdirectories or any of their subdirectories.  The C<**> wildcard will not
follow soft links to directories.  It also will never return phony targets.

Makepp's wildcards will ignore files or directories which exist but cannot be
read.  After all, such files cannot be used in the build process anyway.
Putting unreadable files in a directory is primarily useful to inhibit the
automatic import of the given file from a repository.

=head2 Pattern rules

A pattern rule is a rule that is applied based on some textual pattern.  This
is used to apply the same rule to a whole class of files.  The syntax is the
same as GNU make's pattern rules:

    %.o: %.c
 	$(CC) -c $(input) -o $(output)


This says that any file in the current directory which matches C<*.c> can be
converted into the corresponding .o file using the given command.

Note that several pattern dependencies may be supplied.  For example, if
your F<xyz.o> file depends on the corresponding F<xyz.cpp> file, and
also on a file called F<moc_xyz.cflags> which contains the compiler
options, this could be expressed with:

    %.o: %.cpp %.cflags
 	$(CXX) `cat $(stem).cflags` -c $(inputs) -o $(output)

You may also have several pattern targets.  For example,

    %.tab.h %.tab.c : %.y
 	yacc -d $(input)
 	&mv y.tab.h $(stem).tab.h
 	&mv y.tab.c $(stem).tab.c

X<makepp_percent_subdirs>Ordinarily, pattern rules only look for files in the
current directories.  You can force them to search in the current
directory and all directories beneath it by setting

    makepp_percent_subdirs := 1

before the first pattern rule in your makefile or on the command line for example.

=head2 Static pattern rules

A static pattern rule is a pattern rule that is applied only to a
limited set of files:

    $(SPECIAL_MODULES).o : %.o : %.cpp
 	$(CXX) -c $(input) -o $(output)

This says that the pattern rule applies only to the files in
S<C<$(SPECIAL_MODULES).o>>.

This is mostly for compatibility with GNU make; foreach rules (see
below) are a more powerful way of doing the same thing.

=head2 Foreach rules

The above pattern rule syntax is powerful enough to support almost all builds,
but occasionally it is necessary to do something more complicated.  Makepp
provides a more powerful syntax: the C<:foreach> clause for the rule.

    target_expression : dependency_expression : foreach file-list
 	actions

The simplest kind of foreach rule is just a pattern rule whose
application is restricted to a specific list of files.  For example,
suppose you have a pattern rule that tells makepp how to compile all
F<.c> files.  However, you have a list of F<.c> files for which you want
to do something different.  You could do something like this:

    # Here's the rule that applies to everything:
    %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)
 
    %.o : %.c : foreach $(SPECIAL_MODULES)
 	$(CC) $(SPECIAL_CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

An even more powerful use of foreach rules takes advantage of the fact
that the variable C<$(foreach)> is set in turn to each file matching the
file list and the target and dependency expressions are evaluated.  The
file-list may contain wildcards, and these match even files which don't
exist yet but which can be built (see L<makepp_rules/Wildcards>).

This is an unwieldy syntax but it is extremely flexible, because the
C<$(foreach)> variable may appear in any way in the expression.  First,
note that pattern rules are in fact a special case of foreach rules; the
pattern rule

     %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

is exactly equivalent to:

    $(patsubst %.c, %.o, $(foreach)) : $(foreach) : foreach *.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

(In fact, it's converted to approximately that internally.)

As an example of how you would use a C<:foreach> clause where a pattern
rule isn't sufficient, suppose you have some F<.c> files which are built
using some kind of preprocessor which takes as input files with a F<.k>
extension.  You want to compile those F<.c> files with a different set
of compilation options than the usual F<.c> files which are ordinary
source files.  You could do something like this:

    # Rule for ordinary .c files:
    %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)
 
    # Rule to make .c files from .k files:
    %.c : %.k
 	$(preprocessor) $(input) > $(output)
 
    # Special build rules for .c files which are made from .k files:
    $(foreach:%.k=%.o) : $(foreach:%.c=%.k) : foreach *.k
 	$(CC) $(SPECIAL_CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

(This uses the slightly more concise substitution reference syntax
rather than calling C<patsubst> explicitly.)

Note that if all you want to do is to change the value of a variable
(C<CFLAGS> in this case) it's sometimes more convenient to use
L<target-specific variables|makepp_variables/Target-specific assignments>.

=head2 Legacy suffix rules

For backward compatibility, makepp supports the old-style
suffix rules.

    .suffix1.suffix2:
 	actions

is equivalent to

    %.suffix2: %.suffix1
 	actions

but much harder to remember.  (Which suffix comes first?)  Typically,
a rule will appear in a legacy makefile like this:

    .c.o:
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $*.c -o $*.o

which is exactly equivalent to

    %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

=head2 Conflicting rules

When there is more than one way to make a file, makepp
uses a simple procedure to determine which rule to use.

=over 4

=item *

It is an error to have conflicting explicit rules for building a file.

=item *

Pattern rules and foreach rules with wildcards never override explicit
rules.  Thus explicit rules can be used to specify exceptions for
pattern rules.  (Note that simply using a C<:foreach> clause doesn't
make something a pattern rule.  It must have a wildcard (like "*" or
"?") as part of the filename in the C<:foreach> clause.  If it is just
an explicit list of files, it is treated as an explicit rule for each of
those files.)

=item *

When conflicting pattern rules come from different makefiles, rules from
"nearer" makefiles override rules from "farther" makefiles.  "Nearer"
means that the makefile is located closer to the target in the directory
hierarchy (i.e., the file name of the target relative to the directory
the makefile is run from is shorter).  If this doesn't distinguish the
makefiles, then the rule from the makefile which is loaded latest is
used.

This means that you can specify a pattern rule that applies to all files
in your entire directory tree in just the top-level makefile, but then
you can override it in a lower-level makefile.  For example, your
top-level makefile could contain:

    %.o : %.c : foreach **/*.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

and you could have a makefile in one of the subdirectories that says:

    %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(SPECIAL_CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

=item *

Pattern rules that have a shorter chain of inference are preferred over
other pattern rules.  For example, if you had the following rules (based
on an example from the linux kernel):

    %.s: %.c
 	$(CC) -s $(input) -o $(output)
 
    %.o: %.s
 	$(AS) $(input) -o $(output)
 
    %.o: %.c
 	$(CC) -c $(input) -o $(output)


If we need to build C<xyz.o>, we could either build the intermediate
C<.s> file and then run that through the assembler using the first two
rules, or we could go directly to a C<.o> file using the last rule.  The
last rule is preferred because there are fewer steps in the chain of
inference (one instead of two).

=item *

Pattern rules later in a makefile override pattern rules that are
earlier.  (This is backwards from GNU make.)  This means that you should
put your more general rules earlier, and your more specific rules later.
For example,

    %.o: %.c                            # General compilation rule.
 	action
 
    special_%.o: special_%.c            # Special rule for files with a
 	different action                # "special_" prefix.

=back

=head2 Rule options

Sometimes it is necessary to supply additional options to modify how
makepp executes the rule.  These options are specified as C<:optionname
value>, either on the line containing the dependencies, or on the next
line.

Supplying the options on separate lines may make it possible for
you to use the same makefile with makepp and a traditional
make.  For example,

    target : dependencies
 	   : signature target_newer
 	actions

will work fine with a traditional unix make, because it interprets the
S<C<: signature>> line as a shell command, and a command beginning with
a colon does nothing.

=head3 build_cache /path/to/build/cache X<build_cache>

     target : dependencies
 	    : build_cache /put/cache/files/over/there
 	  actions

Specifies the path to a build cache to be used for files produced by
this rule.  This overrides the effect of the C<build_cache> statement or
the C<--build-cache> command line option for this rule.  See
L<makepp_build_cache> for details about build caches.

If you specify C<none> instead of a path, you disable the build cache
for this particular rule.  This can be useful to avoid wasting disk
space on files that you know aren't useful to cache, either because you
are very sure they will never be reused or because they are built so
fast that it's not worth caching them.

=head3 build_check build_check_method X<build_check>

     target : dependencies
 	    : build_check target_newer
 	  actions

This tells makepp what algorithm to use to decide if the targets need to
be rebuilt.  See L<makepp_build_check> for more details.  This overrides
any build check method specified with the C<--build-check-method>
command line option or with the C<build_check> statement.

=head3 signature signature_method X<signature>

     target : dependencies
 	    : signature md5
 	  actions

This tells makepp what algorithm to use to determine if the dependencies have
changed.  See L<makepp_signatures> for more details.  Signature methods which
are included with the makepp distribution are are C<plain>, C<md5>,
C<c_compilation_md5>, and C<shared_object>.  This overrides any signature
method specified with the C<-m> or C<--signature-method> command line options,
or with the C<signature> statement.

=head3 scanner name X<scanner>

This tells makepp how to scan for include files.  Usually, makepp
guesses how to do this based on the words in the command itself (see
L<makepp_scanning> for details).  However, if makepp guesses wrongly,
you may want to explicitly indicate the scanner, like this:

    %.o: %.abc
 	: scanner c_compilation
 	action here

This causes makepp to perform the same scanning that it does for C/C++
build commands, even if it doesn't recognize the action as a C
compilation.

Legal values for C<:scanner> are (currently):

=over 4

=item none

Don't bother scanning the command or any files at all.  Makepp will not
know about any dependencies or targets other than those explicitly
listed in the rule.  This is the default for all commands that makepp
does not recognize.

=item c_compilation

Uses the scanner for C/C++ compilation, which looks for include files.

=item esqlc_compilation

Uses the scanner for Embedded SQL in C/C++ (pre)compilation, which looks for
include files.  If you use Oracle Pro*C, it also understands the config
parameter, parsing the file and also depending on it.  So, if you have
C<config=whatever.oracfg>, you can give a more readable variant, by simply
adding a rule to generate it, like:

    %.oracfg: %.cfg
	&grep '/^[^#\n]/' $(input) -o $(output)


=back

The default scanner depends on the command.  If you do not specify a
C<:scanner> option, then the first word of the command is examined.  If
it looks like a compile or link command, then makepp will use the
C<c_compilation> scanner; otherwise it usese the C<none> scanner.  For
more details on this, or if you want to write your own scanner or change
makepp's default scanners, see L<makepp_scanning>.

=head3 env VARIABLE ... X<env>

Add a dependency on the values of the named environment variables.  If
any of them differ from the previous build, then the targets are considered
out of date, if the build_check method so dictates.  (All of the built-in
build check methods except for target_newer respect this.)

VARIABLE may be of the form "filename in PATH_VARIABLE" (in quotes), in
which case the targets are considered out of date if the first directory
from the colon-delimited value of PATH_VARIABLE in which filename exists
is different from the last build.  This can be used to avoid rebuilding
the targets when PATH_VARIABLE changes in an irrelevant way.

=head3 dispatch command ... X<dispatch>

Enclose each shell action (but not perl actions nor perl commands) in a
C<sh -c '...'> and prefix it with command, but assume that the target doesn't
depend on command.
This is useful if you want to send actions to a job queuing system, but
the result is assumed to be independent of the queueing parameters, as well
as to whether the queueing system is used at all.

=head3 last_chance X<last_chance>

Enable an open-ended rule, such as

    %.foo foo%.bar: :last_chance
 	&echo $@ -o $@
 	&cp $(outputs)

Because a rule such as this could generate an essentially infinite number of
targets, a target of this rule will not match a $(wildcard) function or
pattern rule unless something else has already instanced the rule by
referencing the target specifically.
Furthermore, if C<--rm-stale> is specified, then a target left over from a
previous makepp run will appear stale if the only way to build it is via
a last_chance rule that hasn't been instanced for the target yet,
which is a desirable behavior because the build will fail more consistently
when it erroneously relies on a wildcard to match targets from a previous run.

The C<:last_chance> option is intended to call attention to the special
behavior of the rule with respect to matching wildcards.

=head2 Special characters

Makepp can support filenames that have special characters
in them like a colon or a space.  Suppose, for example, you want to
create a file called C<a:thing> from the file
C<b:thing>.  You can't write the rule this way:

    a:thing : b:thing       # This is a syntax error
 	&cat $(input) -o $(output)

because makepp won't know which colons separate targets from
dependencies and which are part of the filenames.  Instead, simply
enclose the name in quotes, like this:

    "a:thing" : "b:thing"
 	&cat $(input) -o $(output)

Now the rule is unambiguous.

Makepp's quoting syntax is quite similar to the shell's.  You can, for
example, use single quotes instead of double quotes, or you can escape special
characters with a backslash:

    a\:thing : 'b:thing'
 	&cat $(input) -o $(output)

Suppose, for example, that your filename is C<'"!;\$>.  Now why you'd want
such a filename I don't know, but here are several ways you could specify it
to makepp (and the shell):

    \''"!;\$$'
    "'\"!;\\$$"

Pay attention as to when makepp strips quotes and when the shell does.  Makepp
looks at quotes only in the following cases:

=over

=item *

in the C<ifeq> family of tests

=item *

before and after the rule colon

=item *

in a makepp builtin command

=item *

in a function that pertains to files

=back

Unlike the shell, makepp doesn't expand quotes while assigning them to a
variable.  Thus the following rules are identical:

    FILE = 'name with spaces'
    x := $(print $(FILE))	# just to check that quotes are still there
    $(FILE):			# quotes around single file stripped by makepp
	&echo hello -o$(FILE)	# quotes around single file stripped by makepp
 	echo there >>$(FILE)	# quotes around single file stripped by Shell
    'name with spaces':
	&echo hello -o'name with spaces'
 	echo there >>'$(output)' # quotes were stripped above, add them again

Note that (unlike the Shell) variables beginning with C<$> are expanded even
inside single quotes.  Dollar signs cannot be protected by quotes or
backslashes.  To get a literal dollar sign, use a double dollar sign,
e.g.,

    $(phony all):
 	@&echo This is a dollar sign: $$
 	@for val in a b c d; do echo $$val; done

Generally, you should be able to deal with just about any special character by
quoting it in some way.  This includes spaces, control characters, etc.
However, be aware that at present, makepp's comment stripping is somewhat
simplistic, and any C<#> characters preceded by whitespace will be interpreted
as comments no matter how they are quoted.

When a target or dependency name is put into an automatic variable like
L<C<$(output)>|makepp_variables/output>, then the quotes and any backslashes
are stripped.  This means that if you want to reference the filename in the
actions, you will probably have to quote it again, like this:

    "a file name with spaces":
 	echo "Special contents" > "$@"

If you don't put the quotes around C<$@>, then the
shell will see the command

    echo "Special contents" > a file name with spaces

which writes the string "Special contents file name with spaces" to the file
called F<a>.  This is probably not what you want.

=head1 AUTHOR

Gary Holt (holt-makepp@gholt.net)

