=head1 NAME

makepp_variables -- How to use variables in makepp

=for vc $Id: makepp_variables.pod,v 1.28 2008/05/10 09:17:23 pfeiffer Exp $

=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<B<A>R|/AR>, L</ARFLAGS>, L</AS>,E<nbsp>
L<B<C>C|/CC>, L</CFLAGS>, L</changed_dependencies>, L</changed_inputs>, L</CURDIR>,
  L</CXX>, L</CXXFLAGS>,E<nbsp>
L<B<d>efine|/define>, L</dependencies>, L</dependency>,E<nbsp>
L<B<e>xport|/export>,E<nbsp>
L<B<F>77|/F77>, L</FC>, L</foreach>,E<nbsp>
L<B<g>lobal|/global>,E<nbsp>
L<B<i>nput|/input>, L</inputs>,E<nbsp>
L<B<L>D|/LD>, L</LEX>, L</LIBTOOL>,E<nbsp>
L<B<M>AKE|/MAKE>, L</MAKECMDGOALS>, L</MAKEINFO>, L</makepp_percent_subdirs>,
  L</makepp_require_phony>, L</makepp_simple_concatenation>,E<nbsp>
L<B<o>utput|/output>, L</outputs>,E<nbsp>
L<B<P>WD|/PWD>,E<nbsp>
L<B<R>M|/RM>, L</ROOT>,E<nbsp>
L<B<S>HELL|SHELL>, L</sorted_dependencies>, L</sorted_inputs>, L</stem>,E<nbsp>
L<B<t>arget|/target>, L</targets>,E<nbsp>
L<B<Y>ACC|/YACC>,E<nbsp>
C<=>,
C<:=>,
C<+=>,
C<?=>,
C<!=>,
C<$@>,
C<$^>,
C<$*>,
C<$+>,
C<$?>,
C<$/>,
C<$E<lt>>

Makefiles typically use variables in many places.  One important reason for
using variables is to ensure that information is contained in only one place
in the makefile, so that if it changes, there is no danger of the two copies
of the information getting out of sync.

Variable names are case sensitive.  In theory, variable names can be made of
many characters, but you will probably confuse the makefile parser if you do
anything other than alphanumeric characters, C<_>, and C<->.

Each makefile has its own set of variables, and setting a variable in one
makefile will have no effect on its value in any other makefile.  If you want
to have variables set in many makefiles, the best way to do it is to have each
of them include a common definitions file (see the
L<include statement|makepp_statements/include>) or use C<global> variables.


=head2 Variable Assignment

A variable can assume a value in several different ways:

=over 4

=item *

A variable may be set inside a makefile.  There are a number of different ways
to do this; see below.

=item *

A variable's value may be specified on the command line, like this:

    makepp CFLAGS=-O2 my_program

If more than one makefile is loaded, the CFLAGS variable is propagated to all
of the makefiles.  Variables set on the command line automatically override
any setting of the variable in any of the makefiles.

If ever needed, the makefile must in turn explicitly override command line
settings.  The intention is not to ignore what the user requests, but rather a
way to modify it.  The C<override> modifier may precede any assignment
statement.  But in the case of keyword statements, the order is important,
which is why the override variant is always shown below.  The C<override>
modifier applies only to any assignments where it is present, and does not
influence later assignments to the variable.

=item *

If a variable is set in the environment, it can be referenced as a makepp
variable.  Ordinarily assignments to variables inside a makefile override
settings from the environment, but you can change this by using the C<-e> or
C<--environment-overrides> command line option.

=back

Variables are assigned with one of several assignment expressions, like this

    X = 1
    MODULES := a b c d
    CC ?= gcc
    CFLAGS += -Wall
    define VAR
      var line 1
      var line 2
    enddef
    export PATH := $(PWD):$(PATH)
    global MYPROJECT.INFO = info to be seen in all makefiles

Leading and trailing whitespace around values is always stripped off.

The different assignment operators have somewhat different meanings.

=head3 Simple assignment operators

=over 4

=item =

    VARIABLE = text string
    override VARIABLE = text string

This is the usual assignment statement that all implementations of make
support.  The expression on the right hand side is not evaluated until the
value of C<$(VARIABLE)> is actually used somewhere.  Thus, if you do the
following:

    X = 1
    Y = $(X)
    X = 2

Then C<$(Y)> later in the makefile will evaluate to "2".

In general, you usually want to use C<:=> (see below) instead of C<=>
because it provides more predictable variable evaluation.  However,
there are times when you need to defer the variable evaluation.  Also,
if you're writing a makefile that must be backwards-compatible with some
version of make other than GNU make, then you have no choice: you may
only use C<=>.

=item :=

    VARIABLE := expr
    override VARIABLE := expr

This is the same as C<VARIABLE = expr> except that the right hand side is
evaluated once and for all at the time of the assignment.  Thus if

    X := 1
    Y := $(X)
    X := 2

then C<$(Y)> later in the makefile will evaluate to "1" since that's what
C<$(X)> was when C<$(Y)> was defined.

=item ;=

    VARIABLE ;= expr
    override VARIABLE ;= expr

This is the same as C<VARIABLE := expr> except that the right hand side is
evaluated only at the time of the first use and then remembered.  This is
useful for expensive commands, which always return the same value, but which
you don't want to perform when building unrelated targets:

    VAR1 ;= $(perl expensive calculations)
    VAR2 ;= $(shell external command)

Note that old makefiles will usually use C<:=> here, to at least do this only
once.  But with this operator you can even additionally not do it, if you
currently don't need the value.  For values which are identical in several
directories, you can optimize this further with C<global>, discussed below.

=item +=

    VARIABLE += expr
    override VARIABLE += expr

Appends the string to the previous contents of the variable, separated by a
space.  If the variable was previously assigned with C<:=>, then the right
hand side is evaluated before appending.

=item &=

    VARIABLE &= expr
    override VARIABLE &= expr

Prepends the string to the previous contents of the variable, separated by a
space.  If the variable was previously assigned with C<:=>, then the right
hand side is evaluated before appending.

For example one way of guaranteeing that C<CFLAGS>, whatever else the user may
put in, always starts with C<-Wall> are these two lines:

    CFLAGS = -O2		# Possibly overridden on the command line
    override CFLAGS &= -Wall	# Unconditionally prepended

In old makefiles you typically had to do something like this, which had the
side effect of forcing the type to C<:=> to prevent endless recursion:

    VARIABLE := expr $(VARIABLE)

=item ?=

    VARIABLE ?= expr
    override VARIABLE ?= expr	# Useless, but legal

Sets the value of the variable, but only if the variable is not
specified earlier in the makefile, on the command line, or in
the environment.  The above assignment is exactly equivalent to

    ifndef VARIABLE
      VARIABLE = expr
    endif

=item !=

    VARIABLE != shell command
    override VARIABLE != shell command

Runs the shell command and sets the variable to contain the command's
standard output.  This is exactly equivalent to

    VARIABLE := $(shell command)

=back

=head3 Multiline variables

The C<define> statement is the multiline equivalent of the simple statements
above.  The operator after the variable is optional.  If missing, it is
equivalent to C<define VARIABLE =>.  The C<&=> and C<+=> operators are
slightly different here, in that they glue this to the old value with a
newline, rather than a space.  There must not be anything except a comment
after the statement, i.e. the value starts on the next line.

    define VARIABLE :=
    first line of variable's value
    second line of variable's value
    third line of variable's value
    endef

    override define VARIABLE +=	# Operator is not optional with override
    ...
    enddef

If you need a variable's value to contain newlines, you must use the C<define>
statement as shown (or you can assign the value directly in perl).  (C<endef>
was chosen for compatibility with GNU make.  You may also use C<enddef>.)
This is primarily useful for "canned command sequences", e.g., something like
this:

    define COMPILE_C_PROGRAM
 	@&echo "Compiling $(input)"
 	@$(CC) $(CFLAGS) $(CPPFLAGS) $(INCLUDES) -c $(input) -o $(output)
    endef

Then you can use this multi-line variable in several rules, like this:

    %.o : %.c
 	$(COMPILE_C_PROGRAM)

    $(ARCH)/%.o : $(ARCH)/%.c
 	$(COMPILE_C_PROGRAM)

Note that you can often achieve the same effect by using a semicolon
instead of a newline, because the shell interprets that as a command
delimeter too.  For example,

    COMPILE_C_PROGRAM = @echo "Compiling $(input)"; \
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) $(CPPFLAGS) $(INCLUDES) -c $(input) -o $(output)

will have the same effect, except that the semicolon forces perl to pass it to
the shell, instead of executing the command directly and more efficiently.
You also have to put each builtin on a line of its own, meaning that you have
to switch to the external echo in the semicolon case.

There is one speciality when expanding within C<define>, i.e. C<define X :=>
or on a variable that was already C<:=>, C<define X &=> and C<define X +=>.
In this case the C<$(shell command ...)> or builtin C<$(&command ...)> do not
get newlines transformed into spaces.

=head3 Exporting variables to subprocesses

    export VAR ...
    export VAR = value
    override export VAR += value

The first form marks the given variables for export to subprocesses, with
whatever value the variable then has.  The second form, which applies only to
one variable, additionally assigns a value right away.  All the variants of
assignment are allowed.

=head3 Sharing variables across makefiles

    global VAR ...
    global VAR = value
    override global VAR &= value

The first form marks the given variables as global to all makefiles.  If any
of them already had a value, that value is moved from the makefile local
variable to the global one.  However if, at the time this statement is seen,
any other makefiles already had a value for any of them, then those makefiles
will not see the global one.

The second form, which applies only to one variable, additionally assigns a
value right away.  All the variants of assignment are allowed.  Note that
C<:=> will expand right away to the values in the local makefile.  On the
contrary C<=> variables will expand to the values at the point of use.

Global variables can be tricky to deal with, because makepp may load makefiles
in any order, as the need arises to build some target for which no rule or
makefiles is loaded.  For this reason it is recommended to have a
F<RootMakeppfile> and to explicitly load all others which modify or use the
variable with C<load-makefile>.

    global GLIBLIBS ;= $(shell pkg-config --libs glib-2.0)

Also note that your project may some day be built together with other
projects.  For this reason it is recommended to always make the project name
part of any global variable name.

=head3 Target-specific assignments

    target: VARIABLE = string
    target: VARIABLE := string
    target: override VARIABLE += string

Sets a target-specific value of the variable.  A target-specific value
is in effect I<only> in an action which produces the given target.  This
is primarily used for things like this:

    CFLAGS := -O2
 
    my_prog: file1.o file2.o special_file.o
 
    special_file.o : CFLAGS := -g
 
    %.o: %.c
 	  $(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)


What happens here is that all C<.c> files will be compiled with
optimization (C<-O2>) I<except> C<special_file.c>, which is compiled
in debug mode (C<-g>).  This is a convenient way to specify different
compilation options for only a few files.

Target-specific variable assignments like this apply only to the actions
of the rule; they are not in effect when evaluating the targets or the
dependencies of a rule.  If a rule has more than one target,
target-specific variable assignents are taken only from the I<first>
target.  Also note that makepp's target-specific variables are slightly
different from GNU make's in that they only apply to the rule for the
one file mentioned, and not to any of its predecessors; see
L<makepp_incompatibilities|makepp_incompatibilities/Target Specific Variables> for
details.

Wildcard expansion is performed on the target, so you can do something
like this:

    test_*.o : CFLAGS += -DTEST

For compatibility with GNU make, C<%> may be used in place of C<*>.

=head2 Variable Substitution

Makepp's variable substitution rules are similar to those of other
makes, but somewhat more powerful.  As in all makes, C<$(CC)> or
C<${CC}> both represent the value of the variable CC.  If you need a
literal dollar sign, put in a double dollar sign (C<$$>), like this:

    target: dep1 dep2 dep3 dep4
 	&rm -f $(output)
 	for file in $(inputs); do cat $$file >> $(output); done

Additionally makepp has a C<$[VARIABLE]> syntax, which does the same thing as
the other two, but before any other parsing happens.  This allows using it for
complete rules and/or conditionals:

    define bracket_rule =
      ifdef SOME_VAR
 	bracket:
 	    &echo this is a rule -o $(output)
      endif
    enddef

    $[bracket_rule]


=head3 rc-style substitution

By default, makepp uses rc-style substitution (so called because it was
pioneered by the rc shell).  This is best illustrated by an example:

    MODULES = a b c d
 
    mylib.a : module_dir/$(MODULES).o $(OTHER_OBJECTS)
 	$(CXX) $(dependencies) -o $(target)


The prefix C<module_dir/> is prepended to each word in MODULES, and the suffix
C<.o> is appended to each word.

You can also use rc-style substitution without even putting the list of words
into a variable; the syntax is S<C<$( word1 word2)>>.  Note the space between
the parenthesis and the first word.  So the above example could have been
written as:

    mylib.a : module_dir/$( a b c d).o $(OTHER_OBJECTS)
 	$(CXX) $(dependencies) -o $(target)

A variable will give rc-style substitution only when there is more than one
word in it.  With one word it is like traditional make.  Alas, when the
variable is empty, there is a conflict.  Traditional makes simply expand it to
the empty string.  But when you think of it as a list, you'd want
C<-I$(DIRLIST)> to dissapear, not to give a lonely C<-I>.  The solution is to
wrap it into a list that starts with a space: C<-I$( $(DIRLIST))> gives you
exactly as many options, as there are words in the list.

If you put several variables in the same word which expand to arrays of
words, rc-style substitution actually takes the cartesian product, so
you can do something like this if you want:

    DIRS = s1 s2
    MODULES = a b c
    SUFFIXES = .o .c
    FILES := $(DIRS)/$(MODULES)$(SUFFIXES)

and FILES will contain the string

    s1/a.o s1/a.c s1/b.o s1/b.c s1/c.o s1/c.c s2/a.o s2/a.c s2/b.o s2/b.c s2/c.o s2/c.c

If rc-style substitution gets in the way, or if you need to have leading or
trailing whitespace in your make variables, then you can turn off rc-style
substitution by setting the variable C<makepp_simple_concatenation=1>.  You
can turn it off globally on the command line or as an environment variable.
Or on a per-makefile basis by setting the variable in your makefile.  You
should do this near the top of the makefile, or else you may run into funny
situations where rc-style substitution is used for some evaluations and not
others.  (All expressions evaluated before the assignment will use rc-style
substitutions, and all expressions evaluated after will not.  Since the time
of evaluation of expressions in makefiles is complicated and not always
obvious from the order of statements in the makefile, it's best to set
C<makepp_simple_concatenation> as early as possible.)  You can even set it
just for one target:

    target: makepp_simple_concatenation = 1
    target:
	&echo before_first$(LIST)after_last -o $(output)

Because C<$[VARIABLE]> is evaluated earlier than C<$(VARIABLE)>, combining the
two in rc-substitution will not give the result you may expect:

    A = a b
    N = 1 2
    X := $(A)$[N]

The last line gets read as

    X := $(A)1 2

which gives C<X> a value of C<a1 b1 2>.

=head3 Substitution References

A substitution reference has the form C<$(VAR:A=B)>, where A is a pattern to
match and B is a pattern to replace it with.  For example:

    source_files = a.c b.c c.c d.c
    object_files = $(source_files:%.c=%.o)


will set C<$(object_files)> to S<C<a.o b.o c.o d.o>>.  The C<%> is a special
character matches any arbitrary string.  Substitution references are an
abbreviation fot the C<patsubst> function.

=head3 Whitespace in variables

If you need to control the whitespace in a variable, you must (currently)
disable rc-style substitution (by setting C<makepp_simple_concatenation=1>)
and then use a syntax like this:

    null =
    T = -o $(null)

or, with an empty evaluation:

    T = -o $()

When you do this, the variable C<T> contains C<-o> followed by a space.

This kind of a technique to handle whitespace is not recommended.  If
you need variables in your makefile to contain spaces, you should think
seriously about what you're doing.  If you need to handle spaces, it is
usually much better to put perl code into your makefile to take care of
it (using the C<perl_begin> or C<sub> statements), or to handle it in
shell statements in the actions of rules.

These cases typically come up when people attempt to use the same rules
for different architectures which do not use typical unix command
syntax.  E.g., sometimes one sees things like this in makefiles:

    ifeq ($(ARCH),weirdarch)
      O := /OUTPUT=
    else
      null :=
      O := -o $(null)
    endif
 
    %.o : %.c
 	$(COMPILER) $(input) $(O)$(output)

You can do this with makepp if you really want to, but you will probably
find that your makefiles are substantially more readable if you have
less complicated variable stubstitution, e.g.,

    ifeq ($(ARCH),weirdarch)
      %.o : %.c
 	$(WEIRD_COMPILER) $(input) /OUTPUT=$(output)
    else
      %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) -c $(input) -o $(output)
    endif

Whitespace is never allowed in variable names, only in their values.  This is
different from some make implementations.

=head2 Automatic Variables

Automatic variables are variables that assume different values depending
on which rule they are evaluated in.  Makepp supports most of the
automatic variables that other versions of make use.  In addition, it
has less cryptic, longer names for most of them that you can use
instead.  (For legacy makefiles that happen to redefine these names, the
definition in the makefile overrides the default meaning.  For example,
if you say S<C<target = abc>> in your makefile, then C<$(target)> will
always expand to C<abc>, and will no longer be equivalent to C<$@>.)

The following is a complete list of all the automatic variables that
makepp supports:

=over 4

=item target

=item output

=item $@

The target of the current rule.  Actually, since makepp supports multiple
targets for any rule, this is the B<first> target.  For example, in the
following rule

    y.tab.c y.tab.h : parser.y
 	$(YACC) $(YFLAGS) $(input)

C<$(output)> will contain the value F<y.tab.c>.  Since these magic variables
are in fact functions, you can also pass an index as argument.  This counts
from 1 or backwards from -1.  So C<$(output 2)> or C<$(output -1)> will
contain the value F<y.tab.h>.

=item targets

=item outputs

All targets of the current rule.  Same as C<$(target)> unless there is more
than one target.  In the above example, C<$(outputs)> will be S<y.tab.c
y.tab.h>.  You can pass an index list, so C<$(outputs 2 1)> will be S<y.tab.h
y.tab.c>.

=item dependency

=item input

=item $E<lt>

The first explicit dependency of the rule.  For example, in this rule

    %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

C<$(input)> will be the name of the F<.c> file, regardless of what F<.h> files
makepp discovers.  If you specify more than one dependency, you can get them
by passing an index: C<$(input $(INDEX))> is the INDEXth depencency.

=item dependencies

=item inputs

=item $^

All the explicit dependencies of the target, not including F<.h> files
discovered by L<makepp_scanning> for includes.

For example, in the rule

    myprog.o : *.o
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) $(inputs) -o $(output)

C<$(inputs)> will be all the .o files in the directory.  You can pick only the
ones you want by passing an index list.  If you explicitly specify different
kinds of files, you can pick them as in C<$(inputs 2 3 4)> (but with a
wildcard this is not too promising).

=item sorted_dependencies

=item sorted_inputs

=item $+

All the dependencies of the target, in sorted order, with duplicates
removed.  Equivalent to S<C<$(sort $(inputs))>>.

=item changed_inputs

=item changed_dependencies

=item $?

The dependencies of the target that have changed.  This includes only
explicit dependencies (i.e., ones you list in the makefile), not
implicitly discovered dependencies from scanning (such as .h files).

This is commonly used in commands like this:

    libmine.a : $(MODULES) : build_check ignore_action
 	$(AR) ru $@ $?

i.e., F<ar> is told to replace only those modules that have changed.
(Note the C<ignore_action> build check rule.  If you don't specify this,
makepp will force the action to be executed whenever it changes.  If no
dependencies have changed, the action string will be S<C<ar ru
libmine.a>> which is probably different from what it was last time you
ran it, so without C<ignore_action> makepp will execute it.  In this
case, it's harmless, but with other commands, it could be a problem.
See L<makepp_build_check> for details on C<ignore_action>.)

Building archives like this is not a good idea because it will make your
builds less reliable.  The problem with this is that if you build the
archive, then remove one of the modules from the list of MODULES, the
modules will still be in the archive and makepp

=item stem

=item $*

The stem in a pattern rule (i.e., whatever the '%' matched).
Alternatively, if this is not a pattern rule, returns the file name
without the extension (i.e., it's equivalent to
S<C<$(basename $(input))>>.

This is mostly for backward compatibility.  For example, in old versions
of make the only way to tell it how to compile any F<.c> file into the
corresponding F<.o> file was like this:

    .c.o:
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $*.c -o $*.o

This is a lousy way to write the rule.  It's much clearer to use
GNU-make style pattern rules, like this:

    %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

=item foreach

The current filename from the C<foreach> clause.  C<foreach> clauses are
rarely used, but they are the most general-purpose kind of pattern rule
that makepp supports.  For example,

    #
    # Build .c files with some sort of a special preprocessor:
    #
    %.c : %.k
 	$(preprocessor) $(input) > $(output)
 
    #
    # Compile .c files into .o files:
    #
    %.o : %.c
 	$(CC) $(CFLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)
 
    #
    # Special alternate compilation flags for .c files which are derived
    # from .k files:
    #
    $(foreach:%.k=%.o) : $(foreach:%.k=%.c) : foreach *.k
 	$(CC) $(SPECIAL_K_FLAGS) -c $(input) -o $(output)

See the documentation on L<the foreach clause in
rules|makepp_rules/Foreach rules> for more details and examples.

=item $/

This is essentially a constant, either C</>, or on native Windows C<\>.  You
need it, if you want to start a program portably, e.g. one you built in the
current directory:

    myoutput:
 	.$/myprog >$(output)

For filenames passed as arguments it is not so necessary as Windows can handle
Unix syntax there.

=back

=head2 Predefined Variables

Makepp predefines a few variables, which you can override:

=over

=item AR

I<Default:> C<ar>.

=item ARFLAGS

I<Default:> C<rv>.

=item AS

I<Default:> C<as>.

=item CC

I<Default:> The first found among C<gcc>, C<egcc>, C<pgcc>, C<c89> or C<cc>, or on
Windows additionally C<cl> or C<bcc32>.

=item CFLAGS

I<Default:> If C<$(CC)> is a Gnu compiler C<-g -Wall>, if it is one of the two
Windows compilers nothing, else C<-g>.

=item CURDIR

The directory in which the current Makefile resides.

=item CXX

I<Default:> The first found among C<g++>, C<c++>, C<pg++>, C<cxx>, C<C>C<C> or C<aCC>,
or on Windows additionally C<cl> or C<bcc32>.

=item CXXFLAGS

I<Default:> If C<$(CXX)> is a Gnu compiler C<-g -Wall>, if it is one of the two
Windows compilers nothing, else C<-g>.

=item F77

I<Default:> The first found among C<f77>, C<g77> or C<fort77>.

=item FC

I<Default:> C<$(F77)>.

=item LD

I<Default:> C<ld>.

=item LEX

I<Default:> The first found among C<lex> or C<flex>.

=item LIBTOOL

I<Default:> C<libtool>.

=item MAKE

This variable has no default value, and is not used by makepp.  It is however
the preferred way in older makes to implement recursive make.  That's why
makepp recognizes when this variable is used and turns off some features, even
before the recursion actually takes place.

=item MAKECMDGOALS

This variable is set but not used by makepp.  You can query it to do
something only if a certain target was requested.

I<Default:> Whatever explicit targets the user (or a recursive invocation)
provided.  Empty when implicitly building default target.

    ifneq $(filter special-target, $(MAKECMDGOALS))
 	# special-target is one of the current explicit targets
    else ifeq $(MAKECMDGOALS)
 	# no explicit targets
    endif

=item MAKEINFO

I<Default:> C<makeinfo>.

=item makepp_percent_subdirs

Set this to some true value (like C<1>) to have C<%> in targets or
dependencies match across more than one directory.

I<Default:> undefined

=item makepp_require_phony

Set this to some true value (like C<1>) to prevent implicit phonyness (i.e. if
a rule succeeds without producing its target).  This variable should be true
by default, to prevent broken dependency chains, but that would break backward
compatibility with sloppy makefiles.

I<Default:> undefined

=item makepp_simple_concatenation

Set this to some true value (like C<1>) to prevent L</rc-style substitution>.

I<Default:> undefined

=item PWD

An alias for L</CURDIR>.

=item RM

I<Default:> C<rm -f>.  This is meant for legacy Makefiles.  For new ones
preferably use the builtin L<&rm|makepp_builtins/&rm> command directly.  If
you want to write a phony clean rule, look at the C<makeppclean -r> command
instead.

=item ROOT

The relative path to the root of your build system, i.e. the directory further
up in which you have a C<RootMakeppfile(.mk)>.  If you don't have one, this
variable is empty.

=item SHELL

This variable is only respected if you C<export> it.  In that case it is the
Shell which is used to execute not-builtin actions with some special character
in it (plain ones being execed directly).  On Windows ActiveState Perl, if you
have a Unix-like Shell, you must instead set your SHELL variable to a value
ending in C<sh> or C<sh.exe> before calling makepp.

I<Default:> The first found among C</usr/xpg4/bin/sh> (e.g. Solaris) or
C</sbin/xpg4/sh> (e.g. Reliant Unix) or C</bin/sh>.

=item YACC

I<Default:> The first found among C<bison -y> or C<yacc>.

=back

=head2 Variables and perl

Variable values are stored as ordinary perl scalars, so you can access them
directly from perl code if you need to do any complicated manipulations with
them; see L<makepp_extending> for details.

Accessing global variables from Perl is achieved by prefixing them with the
C<global::> package.  In fact any variable, not yet present in the current
makefile, and which you assign to in this package will from then on be global,
as though you had just issued the C<global> statement for it.

This direct access is however error-prone!  The user may have overriden these
variables on the command line or through the environment.  Some other makefile
loaded before this one may have made the variable global or target specific.
In these cases you would not find the value of the variable, or when assigning
it, might take away its property (equivalent to an C<override> modifier,
except for target specifics.)

With direct access you also bypass the expansion of these variables, if they
are of type C<=> or C<;=>.  Special variables like C<$(CC)> start out as
functions, until they are assigned to.  So in many cases you won't see their
value.

For these reasons it is better to let makepp determine the correct value.  You
can use the C<makeperl> variant, in which the variable has been evaluated
before the perl code gets interpreted:

    makeperl { $$current_value = '$(MAKEFILE_VAR)' }

If you need a variable in makefile perl blocks this is achieved via the perl
variable C<$makefile> as follows:

    perl { $current_value = $makefile->expand_variable( 'MAKE_VAR' ) }

Functions always get the makefile object passed in as the second argument
C<$_[1]>:

    sub f_f { $current_value = $_[1]->expand_variable( 'MAKE_VAR' ) }

Commands are supposed to be called within a rule action, where the makefile
object is accessible via C<$Makesubs::rule->{MAKEFILE}>:

    sub c_cmd { $current_value = $Makesubs::rule->{MAKEFILE}->expand_variable( 'MAKE_VAR' ) }

=head1 AUTHOR

Gary Holt (holt-makepp@gholt.net)
