=head1 NAME

makepp_signatures -- How makepp knows when files have changed

=for vc $Id: makepp_signatures.pod,v 1.13 2009/02/09 22:07:39 pfeiffer Exp $

=head1 DESCRIPTION

L<B<c>_compilation_md5|/c_compilation_md5>,E<nbsp>
L<B<m>d5|/md5>,E<nbsp>
L<B<s>hared_object|/shared_object>

Each file is associated with a I<signature>, which is a string that changes if
the file has changed.  Makepp compares signatures to see whether it needs to
rebuild anything.  The default signature for files is a concatenation of the
file's modification time and its size, unless you're executing a C/C++
compilation command, in which case the default signature is a cryptographic
checksum on the file's contents, ignoring comments and whitespace.  If you
want, you can switch to a different method, or you can define your own
signature functions.

How the signature is actually used is controlled by the I<build check method>
(see L<makepp_build_check|makepp_build_check>).  Normally, if a file's
signature changes, the file itself is considered to have changed, and makepp
forces a rebuild.

If makepp is building a file, and you don't think it should be, you might want
to check the build log (see L<makepplog|makepplog>).  Makepp writes an
explanation of what it thought each file depended on, and why it chose to
rebuild.

There are several signature methods included in makepp.  Makepp usually picks
the most appropriate standard one automatically.  However, you can change the
signature method for an individual rule by using C<:signature> modifier on the
rule which depends on the files you want to check (see
L<makepp_rules/signature>), or for all rules in a makefile by using the
C<signature> statement (see L<makepp_statements/signature>), or for all
makefiles at once using the C<-m> or C<--signature-method> command line option
(see L<makepp_command/-m>).

=head2 Mpp::Signature methods included in the distribution

=over 4

=item plain (actually nameless)

The plain signature method is the file's modification time and the file's
size, concatenated.  These values are quickly obtainable from the operating
system and almost always change when the file changes.

Makepp used to look only at the file's modification time, but if you run
makepp several times within a second (e.g., in a script that's building
several small things), sometimes modification times won't change.  Then,
hopefully the file's size will change.

If the case where you may run makepp several times a second is a problem
for you, you may find that using the C<md5> method is somewhat more
reliable.  If makepp builds a file, it flushes its cached MD5 signatures
even if the file's date hasn't changed.

For efficiency's sake, makepp won't reread the file and recompute the complex
signatures below if this plain signature hasn't changed since the last time it
computed it.  This can theoretically cause a problem, since it's possible to
change the file's contents without changing its date and size.  In practice,
this is quite hard to do so it's not a serious danger.  In the future, as more
filesystems switch to timestamps of under a second, hopefully Perl will give us
access to this info, making this failsafe.

=item md5

Computes an MD5 checksum of the file's contents, rather than looking at
the file's date or size.  This means that if you change the date on
the file but don't change its contents, makepp won't try to rebuild
anything that depends on it.

This is particularly useful if you have some file which is often
regenerated during the build process that other files depend on, but
which usually doesn't actually change.  If you use the C<md5> signature
checking method, makepp will realize that the file's contents haven't
changed even if the file's date has changed.  (Of course, this won't
help if the files have a timestamp written inside of them, as archive
files do for example.)

=item c_compilation_md5

This is the default method, if your Perl supports MD5 (standard since 5.8).
It checks if a file's name looks like C or C++ source code, including things
like Corba IDL.  If it does, this method applies.  If it doesn't, it falls
back to plain signatures for binary files (determined by name or else by
content) and else to L</md5>.  Alas you can currently tune what is to be
considered C or binary only by subclassing C<Mpp::Signature::c_compilation_md5> to
get a new signature type and there overriding or extending the methods
C<recognizes_file> and C<excludes_file>.

The idea is to be independent of formatting changes.  This is done by pulling
everything up as far as possible, and by eliminating insignificant spaces.
Words are exempt from pulling up, since they might be macros containing
C<__LINE__>, so they remain on the line where they were.

    // ignored comment
  
    #ifdef XYZ
 	#include <xyz.h>
    #endif
  
    int a = 1;
  
    void f
    (
 	int b
    )
    {
 	a += b + ++c;
    }
  
 	/* more ignored comment */

is treated as though it were

    #ifdef XYZ
    #include<xyz.h>
    #endif
  
  
  
    int a=1;
  
    void f(
  
    int b){
  
  
    a+=b+ ++c;}

That way you can reindent your code or add or change comments without
triggering a rebuild, so long as you don't change the line numbers.  (This
signature method recompiles if line numbers have changed because that causes
calls to C<__LINE__> and most debugging information to change.)  It also
ignores whitespace and comments B<after> the last token.  This is useful for
preventing a useless rebuild if your VC adds lines at a C<$>C<Log$> tag when
checking in.

This method is particularly useful for the following situations:

=over 4

=item *

You want to make changes to the comments in a commonly included header
file, or you want to reformat or reindent part of it.  For one project
that I worked on a long time ago, we were very unwilling to correct
inaccurate comments in a common header file, even when they were
seriously misleading, because doing so would trigger several hours of
rebuilds.  With this signature method, this is no longer a problem.

=item *

You like to save your files often, and your editor (unlike emacs) will
happily write a new copy out even if nothing has changed.

=item *

You have C/C++ source files which are generated automatically by other
build commands (e.g., yacc or some other preprocessor).  For one system
I work with, we have a preprocessor which (like yacc) produces two
output files, a C<.cxx> and a C<.h> file:

    %.h %.cxx: %.qtdlg $(HLIB)/Qt/qt_dialog_generator
 	$(HLIB)/Qt/qt_dialog_generator $(input)

Every time the input file changed, the resulting F<.h> file also was
rewritten, and ordinarily this would trigger a rebuild of everything
that included it.  However, most of the time the contents of the F<.h>
file didn't actually change (except for a comment about the build time
written by the preprocessor), so a recompilation was not actually
necessary.

=back

=item shared_object

This method only works if you have the utility C<nm> in your path, and it
accepts the C<-P> option to output Posix format.  In that case only the names
and types of symbols in dynamically loaded libraries become part of their
signature.  The result is that you can change the coding of functions without
having to relink the programs that use them.

In the following command the command scanner will detect an implicit
dependency on F<$(LIBDIR)/libmylib.so>, and build it if necessary.  However
the link command will only be reperformed whenever the library exports a
different set of symbols:

    myprog: $(OBJECTS) :signature shared_object
 	$(LD) -L$(LIBDIR) -lmylib $(inputs) -o $(output)

This works as long as the functions' interfaces don't change.  But in that
case you'd change the declaration, so you'd also need to change the callers.

Note that this method only applies to files whose name looks like a shared
library.  For all other files it falls back to C<c_compilation_md5>, which may
in turn fall back to others.

=back

=head2 Custom methods

You can, if you want, define your own methods for calculating file
signatures and comparing them.  You will need to write a perl module to
do this.  Have a look at the comments in C<Mpp/Signature.pm> in the
distribution, and also at the existing signature algorithms in
C<Mpp/Signature/*.pm> for details.

Here are some cases where you might want a custom signature method:

=over 4

=item *

When you want all changes in a file to be ignored.  Say you always want
F<dateStamp.o> to be a dependency (to force a rebuild), but you don't
want to rebuild if only F<dateStamp.o> has changed.  You could define a
signature method that inherits from C<c_compilation_md5> that recognizes
the F<dateStamp.o> file by its name, and always returns a constant value
for that file.

=item *

When you want to ignore part of a file.  Suppose that you have a program
that generates a file that has a date stamp in it, but you don't want to
recompile if only the date stamp has changed.  Just define a signature
method similar to C<c_compilation_md5> that understands your file format
and skips the parts you don't want to take into account.

=back
